1/26/05 ideas for experiments, discussed w/ Anil

Baseline data: paced and continuation tapping of individuals in isolation (with/without self-feedback)

Questions: make all the sounds the same (timbre and or loudness) vs individuating tappers
Self feedback distinct? Computer pacing distinct?

Network ideas: control #inputs each node gets
local only
ring

manipulations: examine dynamics when isolating a node, removing connections, changing connections,
adding induction to new nodes

Leader follower dynamics--how expressed? Louder taps / leading timing e.g.

6/25/05
Reading Strogatz's Sync
Cricket experiment proposed (ever completed?) is very similar to mine. There, they planned to smoothly increase
connection strength, looking for some kind of phase transition from random to synchrony. For mine, ask people to tap at
own tempo, ramp up how much they hear others. I predict, however, that even hearing others a little will enable synch,
but perhaps that's the point--it's not a smooth function of connection strength. (K name). Track down biologist who
was doing these experiments. 

Other ideas inspired: Stimulated line: one node is driven (receiving external input), the rest are connected linearly.
Instruction: tap in synch with what you hear. Each person hears only one input. At first the driving input is
random in time, so taps are in reaction--as driving input becomes regular and thus predictable, chart the emergence of
synchrony among the tappers. Variations--randomly change who's being driven from beat to beat. Close the circle.
With/without self feedback. 

Other one, of course, is to have two isolated clusters w/ different temp and then examine behavior as a 'shortcut' is
added linking the two.

Finally, gain some intuition by simulating such experiments, and compare results.

7/26/05
Going to pilot tomorrow
tons of ideas for experiments
two subnets forced at different tempi, let free run, then join one node of each together to see how they reconcile
forced network where forcing comes in only at one node. Let equilibrate then perturb forcing tempo and see how the new
tempo propagates through the network (or if it does--the key here is that the pacemaker is filtered thru a real tapper,
so that signal doesn't appear any different from the rest). [NB be careful, since I tend to force 1 & 6, which are the
lowest and  highest notes, which gives some clue--use 2 and 5 instead.]
